ya que – since (given that)
yo no iré, ya que ella no va – I will not go since she is not going
sea lo que sea – whatever it is
sea lo que sea, es algo bueno – whatever it is, it's something good
no lo quiero ver, sea lo que sea – I don't want to see it, whatever it is
en vez de – instead of
en vez de eso, tienen algo más – instead of that, they have something else
quiero estar en casa en vez de ir – I want to be at home instead of going
sí o sí – either way
ella tiene algo sí o sí – she has something either way
sobre todo – especially
no me podía ir, sobre todo ese día – I couldn't leave, especially that day
no quieren que vayas, sobre todo a ese lugar – they don't want you to go, especially to that place
al tener – upon having/when having
al hacer – upon doing/at the moment of doing
al saber – upon knowing/at the moment of knowing
estuvo feliz al estar en casa – she was happy upon being at home
lo tienen que hacer al ir – They have to do it when they go
Lo voy a decir al tener esos – I am going to say it upon having those
Fuimos buenos al estar en casa – We were good when we got home
para entonces – by then/by that time
Al menos – "at least" (lit. "To the less")
A menos que – "unless". Usually followed by a subjunctive.
Cada vez más – "more and more"
Cada vez menos – "less and less"
Por tal razón – "for such a reason"
Tal vez – "Perhaps" (very similar to quizá). Always follow with a subjunctive.
Como tal – "as such" (you need context)
¿Qué tal? – "how is this thing?" or "What do you think about this thing?" (lit. "What such"). This phrase is followed by a noun.
Al mismo tiempo – "at the same time"
Ya mismo – "right now" in some dialects
Seguro de sí mismo – "confident" or "sure of himself"
Padre – "Padre"
De acuerdo – "in agreement", "I agreement"
Memento de – "It's time to..."
A veces – "sometimes"
Todo el mundo – "all the world", "everybody" (exaggerated)
una y otra vez – again and again
a la vez (todas esas cosas a la vez)
al mismo tiempo (also works) – at once (all those things at once)
de vez en cuando – once in a while
de una vez por todas – once and for all
luego de un tiempo – after a while
En cuanto – "regarding" or "As far as [that goes]..."
En primer lugar – "in the first place..."
Una vez que (triggers subjunctive) – "once this happens" or "once this thing happens"
Poner en su contra – "set them against him"
Por supuesto – "of course"
Me da lo mismo – "it gives me the same" or "I don't care. It is all the same to me"
Me da iquál – "it gives me equal" or "I don't care. It is all the same to me"
The back door – La puerta de atrás
The front door. – La puerta de adelante
What luck! – ¡Qué suerte!
De vuelta – "once again" (in a sense to "return to do something again")
De hecho – "in fact"
Le hace falta – Lit. "it makes him/her a 'lack'" (something is missing). This always takes an I/O.
No le hace falta nada – "nothing is missing"
Tener cuidado – "be/being careful"
Dar una vuelta – "take a turn" (lit. "give a turn")
Dar un paso – "take a step" (lit. "give a step")
Darse cuenta de [que] – "Give yourself account" or "to realize"
Hacer de cuenta [que] – "to pretend" (lit. "to make of account")
Hacerle caso – "listen to" or "obey"
Un par de – "a couple of"
Al final – "in the end"
En fin – sum up or conclude a story. "Anyway", "in a nutshell"
De todas formas – lit. "of all forms", "regardless", "one way or another"
Dame una mano – "give me a hand" ("me" can be changed out)
voy por él – I'm picking him up.
Van por nosotros – They are picking us up.
¡Deja de hacer eso! – Stop doing that!
Te dejan hacer esto. – They're letting you do this.
Trata de hacerlo rápido. – Try to do it quickly.
La historia se trata de una niña. – The story is about a little girl.
Piensan hacerlo. – They're thinking about doing it.
Llamar a la puerta. – "Knocking at a/the door" (lit. To call to the door.)
¿Cómo se llama usted? – What's your name? (lit. how do you call yourself?) (formal)
Eso no cuenta. – That doesn't count.
Puedes contar con él. – You can count on him.
Está por llegar. – It is yet to arrive.
Lo mejor está por llegar. (o Lo mejor está por venir.) – The best is yet to come.
Puedes tomar el que sea. – You can take whichever.
¿Me escuchas? – Can you hear me? (lit. "Can you listen me?")
No pasa nada. – "It's fine, nothing's wrong"
Pasarlo bien – "Having a good time" (lit. "To pass it well")
seguir su camino – "To continue on their way"
volver a [infinitive] – "To do something again
volverse loco – "Going crazy"
(esto) tiene que ver con (eso) – "(this) has to do with (that)"
a ver – "Let's see"
Lo siento – "I'm sorry"
Alguna vez – "ever", "sometime" (future contexts), "once" (past contexts)